# **SDP’s GE2025 Manifesto**

**T - Taxes which are fair:** The SDP has long called for the government to reduce GST, eliminate it on essentials, and ensure that the wealthy pay fairly to balance our revenue generation. Our [**economic policy**](https://drive.google.com/file/d/13j4LyP45Gy-glSaQ-5SgjvnqJuLTB7_P/view?usp=sharing) paper outlines how we will provide support for small and medium- sized enterprises to promote innovation and sustainable growth.

**H - Healthcare which is universal:** Our [**healthcare policy**](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15sAnisdD86kLncCzRAqPn5RtVoSnEsiG/view?usp=sharing) proposes a simple national health insurance system which eliminates the complexities of Medisave, Medishield Life, Careshield, Majulah Generation, etc and uses the savings to empower primary care to provide evidence-based responsive care.

**R - Respect for our planet and people:** Our [**climate policy**](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1mIIW2-DhpWEJc3X-STAmBJTXS-2YJF9D/view?usp=sharing) paper recognises the need for sustainable policies to reduce damage to our green spaces, ensuring that everyone in Singapore has the space to breathe clean and fresh air while our constitutional rights to freedom of speech and expression are protected.

**I - Immigration which is rational:** Rather than the headlong pursuit of population growth at all costs, our [**population policy**](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nwni5V-S2djDL7q-TQ0zjo9R-Oc_ZMyA/view?usp=sharing) features a balanced approach to ensure that people who are committed to Singapore and willing to make a contribution can be part of our Singapore family without crowding out Singaporeans

**V - VERS for affordable housing**: We were promised VERS (Voluntary En-bloc Redevelopment Scheme) seven years ago and still do not have a Government-endorsed solution to lease decay. Our [**housing policy**](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1aCx990z32r0oD3tbQ-cG5H7TuTCJqahi/view?usp=sharing), in contrast, provides a sustainable solution that will be fair to buyers and sellers alike; ensuring that young families can buy their own homes while those who have investment in the property will be able to recover reasonable gains.

**E - Education for children and young people to thrive:** Our [**education policy**](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1mLjIgLn2bIbjPedXw4knxY9KDKwUGAH_/view?usp=sharing)**,** which has had many components adopted in part by the PAP over the years, encourages children to discover themselves and the world we live in rather than turn into highly stressed test takers who have lost the joy of learning. To ensure that these proposals are not simply copied but watered down, the SDP needs to have parliamentary representation. We need our children and their teachers taken care of for the future of our country.

## A New Economic Vision: Towards Innovation, Equal Opportunity, and Compassion

Singapore's  economy  has  registered  dramatic  growth  in  the  last  half  century.  This expansion has, however, come at a cost. It has been steered by the People's Action Party (PAP), the current government, which pays scant regard to democracy and the rights of Singaporeans. Because of this, problems have been emerging. Income inequality, a highly stressed  workforce,  the  absence  of  a  significant  number  of  local  entrepreneurs,  our reputation as a tax haven, and the unhappiness of the local populace with the influx of foreign  labour  have  raised  questions  about  the  sustainability  of  the  country's  current economic model.

The Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) has drawn up an alternative economic programme to  chart  a  different  course  for  our  economy.  Our  programme  emphasises  fairness  and promotes equality and equal opportunity for all. The programme is people-centric and has as its prime objective the well-being and happiness of Singaporeans. It is also an alternative that is both realistic and sustainable.

While  the  current  government  clings  to  policies  that  help  the  elite  get  richer  while 'sticking its spurs' into workers' sides to make us work 'cheaper, better and faster' as our  ministers  have  expressed,  the  SDP's  vision  is  to  create  an  economic  system  that benefits all Singaporeans, one that makes our society more egalitarian by tapping on the people's natural talents and innovation.

Our alternative seeks to level up society. We need a system that works for the people, not vice versa. Material gain must result in collective social good. Gain for its own sake can be destructive to social processes and to a community. And social good can only come about when people are consulted and included in the decision-making process, and when community bonds are strengthened.

At a glance, this is the SDP's plan:

Reduce GST and eliminate it for essentials such as food and medicine. The GST is by its nature a regressive tax as it penalizes the poor who spend a far higher proportion of their income as compared to  the wealthy. At a time of global inflation, the decision to raise the GST  from  7  to  9%  is  very  hard  to  understand.  At  the  same  time,  when  things  had stabilized, our Finance Minister proposed a budget for the current Financial Year with a $6 billion surplus. This is far in excess of the extra GST collected. No rationale was given for taxing the people so far in excess of the services provided by the government. In many countries, food essentials such as bread, rice, milk and cooking oil together with primary care healthcare services are exempt from GST. This ensures that no additional burdens are placed on the public just to build up the government coffers.

Address  the  rising  cost  of  living: In  addition  to  reducing  the  GST  which  will  put  a considerable  amount  of  money  into  the  pockets  of  Singaporeans,  we  also  propose reducing rents which are well within the ability of the government since it owns around 90% of the land in Singapore. In addition, there are a number of indirect taxes such as vehicle Certificates of Entitlement, water and utilities taxes etc which add to the burden of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and are often passed on to consumers. The government's current approach is to provide periodic handouts and vouchers. This may provide temporary relief and a cushion at best, and not address structural issues. Even worse, giving out vouchers can negatively affect the confidence and self esteem of the average  workers  in  Singapore,  making  them  feel  beholden  to  the  government  for continued  handouts.  Instead  of  being  encouraged  to  use  their  own  creativity  and innovation  to  start  small  businesses,  they  are  being  channelled  to  repeated  voucher schemes which appear and disappear apparently at the whims of the government.

Redefine economic progress . We  at  the  SDP  propose  an  alternative  indicator  of economic  progress.  The  PAP  almost  exclusively  relies  on  Gross  Domestic  Product (GDP)  growth  and  the  set  of  metrics  has  an  undue  emphasis  on  production  and consumption.  This  is  why  the  PAP  government  allowed  unfettered  access  for foreigners, leading to overcrowding, burdening the infrastructure, and driving inflation, no thanks to a growth-at-all-cost policy. The problem is that GDP is an insufficientand even misleading-indicator when the cost (social, environmental and financial) of production is not taken into account. With an alternative index, such as the Genuine Progress  Indicator  (GPI),  that  comprehensively  measures  the  cost  and  benefit  of economic growth, we can better gauge the efficacy of our policies. Research has shown that this more accurately reflects citizen wellbeing and the health of a society. With our proposal , the quality of life and overall happiness of our citizens will be the guiding basis for economic growth.

Reduce income inequality .  As  Singapore's  GDP  growth  rate  rises,  so  has  income inequality and poverty in the country especially if all workers in our country are taken into account including the underemployed and migrant workers. To ensure that workers are  not  exploited,  we  propose  the  legislation  of  a  national  minimum  wage.  This  is something not new and was in fact in the PAP election manifesto in 1959 when they were still a democratic socialist party. The Progressive Wage Model is a good start but it  does not recognize the realities on the ground where perpetual training is often not possible for some professions and not all workers are covered.

Provide  retrenchment  insurance  for  workers  who  are  involuntarily  unemployed . Retrenchment insurance paid out of an individual's CPF savings should be  introduced to provide retrenched workers with support while they look for re-employment. While the government has recently (15 April 2025) () introduced a Jobseeker Support Scheme, it is extremely complex and limited in the support provided, capping out at a total of $6000 over six months, with the payout diminishing over the months. Our proposal goes one step further than the diminishing support by providing genuine relief while being sustainable as it does not tap on the reserves but rather builds up a pool from worker's CPF contributions.

Encourage entrepreneurship . Our workers' productivity has been stagnating over the years. First, our society ought to be free and open so that innovation can thrive. Workers must be intrinsically motivated; only this will ensure that they excel in whatever they do and add value to the goods and services they produce. We also aim to cut down on importing foreign PMETs whose main talent is the ability to work at the same jobs for lower salaries.  This  will  help  ensure  that  employers  employ  Singaporeans  first  and avoid  exploitation  of  foreigners.  Only  when  local  talent  cannot  be  found  should foreigners be employed.

Eliminate GLCs, increase SMEs . We  aim  to  encourage  enterprise  by  divesting inefficient  government-linked  companies  (GLCs),  which  are  competing  with  and slowing down the growth of our SMEs, of their untouchable status. One effective way to help local SMEs grow is to reduce land costs and rentals. We will also work towards weaning our economy off its addiction to multinational corporations (MNCs).

Remake the GIC/Temasek model . Singapore's reserves are, effectively, kept with the government through the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC) and Temasek Holdings (TH). These entities are currently being run in a less than transparent manner. The SDP believes that our country's reserves should work for the people, not the other way around. TH should be eliminated and the GIC's operations must be made transparent and its accounts made public. This is in line with best practices in other first world sovereign wealth funds such as the Norwegian The GIC must be restructured to function independently of the ruling party-no member of parliament or their relatives should hold decision making or compensated positions in the company.

Increase social spending . We recommend allocating more resources to help the most vulnerable segments of our society. Evidence from Singapore research has shown that unconditional  cash  assistance  for  the  poorest  of  our  poor  must  increase  in  order  to reduce poverty, address major gaps especially in child support and improve wellbeing of individuals The SDP  Recognizes the value of the Silver support scheme but would favour a much broader scheme which assists 80% of low income elderly with $500 a month to supplement their CPF. This could be funded out of a very small portion of the interest income on the investments of the reserves. It reflects the values of our people in recognizing the hard work of our parents and grandparents who have been the actual people building up our country and not just the political leaders who have not been shy about taking the credit for our success.

Abolish the CPF Minimum Sum Scheme .  Retirees depend on their Central Provident Fund (CPF) savings to meet living expenses. Withholding their savings through the Minimum Sum Scheme is not only impractical but also immoral. The scheme must be abolished and the money returned to members when they retire. Those who want to keep their money in the CPF to enjoy the guaranteed rate of return should be free to do so. The changes in CPF policies must be kept to a minimum. Last year, many of us were disappointed to find that our Special Accounts would disappear once we reach the age of  55.  For  those  of  us  who  had  planned  our  retirements  meticulously  around  the previously guaranteed higher interest rates for the funds in the Special Account, there is always the prospect that the CPF policies could yet change arbitrarily again.

Empower workers .  Beyond  a  certain  level,  no  amount  of  coercion  can  bring  about higher-quality output and productivity. We must empower our workers and upgrade their minds and attitudes by returning them their freedom; it is when they feel a sense of belonging to society that they will be motivated to contribute more than what is asked of them.

We from the SDP believe that Singapore needs a refreshed and enlightened economic model  that  will  take  us  into  a  new  era  of  sustainable  growth-not  consigning  our workers to a cycle of working harder and longer for less and less; one that uplifts our people instead of dumbing them down; and one whose priority is the well-being of all Singaporeans, not just the rich. Only then can we be truly respected on the international stage.

## Healthcare Plan: Carring for all Singaporeans


Healthcare is a basic right enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other similar covenants. It is not a commodity, and we assert that market forces have no part to play in the financing or delivery of basic healthcare to Singaporeans. This was historically the case in Singapore. The availability of lowcost, affordable, quality healthcare in the 1950s, '60s and '70s was one reason for Singapore's rapid progress into the ranks of developed nations. When the Singapore government conducted its first major healthcare financing review with the Blue Paper produced in 1981, Singapore had infant mortality statistics better than the USA and comparable to the UK despite having a completely nationalised healthcare system with a small private component. Restructuring of hospitals only occurred in the mid-1980s without major gains in health outcomes despite major disruption including increased user fees. This is because of the already high quality care provided by 'socialised medicine' in the preceding decades.

No one should risk bankruptcy while seeking life-saving medical treatment. If healthcare is a basic right, then a good system must ensure that even the poorest can afford essential healthcare.

Many individuals and families have experienced how easily their Medisave accounts can be depleted with just one major episode of illness or a complicated surgery. This led to the creation of Medishield however this was found inadequate and after the GE 2011, Medishield Life was started. Finally the safety net program of Medifund was set up when all the resources of an individual have been depleted.

In SDP's healthcare plan of 2012, we proposed that a much higher percentage of government revenue be channelled into healthcare for our citizens. This was to ensure universality and affordability of healthcare. Healthcare expenditures from the government have gone up but a significant proportion of that increase has gone into infrastructure building and redevelopment with a much smaller proportion going into actual patient care. This is partly a result of the hospital centricity of most healthcare funding in Singapore. Major insurance companies often require hospitalisation to pay claims. There is also limited subsidized funding for most outpatient care beyond primary healthcare in polyclinics.

- a. We proposed that Maternal and Pediatric services -should be largely free and funded by the government from the taxes as these are health promoting and have a vital role in the future of our nation. This would reduce the cost of producing and bringing up children and potentially address the problem of our falling birth rates.
- b. We called for Primary healthcare services -for chronic illnesses, to be paid through a risk pooling system so that the cost of running these services will be shared by all in the community. Healthier SG is an attempt to focus on preventative care but does not provide enough support for primary care physicians who are going to end up subsidizing a large proportion of the costs of care. This is because the current system of low consultation charges in primary care is augmented by high medication charges which are discouraged under Healthier SG.
- c. We argued that the running costs of the hospitals must be paid from taxes. This is the only way to bring down the cost of services at the point of use. The creation of two then five and now three clusters has resulted in a significant amount of wastage and

duplication as there are now multiple CEOs, CFOs and other administrators when the whole system was highly efficiently run out of the MOH in the past. The clusters need to be abandoned and we need to return to a single unified public healthcare sector which can result in major economies of scale and better outcomes for patients and healthcare workers.

- d. Hospice care   caring for the dying. No one can abuse such services and such services -should not be dependent on charity. Funding for such services should be from our taxes as well as from donations from appreciative family members of the care receivers as well as other donors.
- e. Home care for the non-ambulant chronic sick -these services should also be funded in the same way as hospice care. Again, no one is going to deliberately choose to be home-bound and nonambulant just to 'abuse' these services.

There must also be greater expansion of the use of other healthcare workers for the delivery of healthcare especially in chronic illnesses and home care. Void decks should be made available for voluntary and community organisations to bring healthcare closer to these patients. Nurse run void deck medical centers potentially in partnership with allied health professionals will make primary care even more accessible as well as chronic disease care and health maintenance.

Finally, the core of the SDP Healthcare proposal is a single-payer universal healthcare system in which the government manages a central healthcare fund. This fund will be run along the lines of a government-subsidised public insurance scheme to finance compulsory basic health, accident and pregnancy (for women) coverage for all citizens and permanent residents (PR) residing here for more than 6 months a year.

This would cover co-payments for all services funded primarily by the government such as hospital services, hospice and other complex services. The premiums would be kept affordable as administrative costs are minimized and there are caps on payments by individuals. Reinsurance will be deployed to cover extremely expensive drugs for rare conditions and those who cannot afford their premiums will have the government cover them. There will also be evidence based guidelines developed independent of industry input to determine which services should be funded and covered by the national health insurance system. It would be a hybrid system in that while digital services are used for the majority, those who are elderly or not comfortable with digital healthcare will have the option for alterative approaches.

Ultimately, the fundamental principle is that healthcare is a basic human rights just like the right to safety. As such, we will commit our resources as a nation not only to protecting our nation's borders and security but also our health and our families' instead of viewing healthcare as an industry driven by profit.

## Climate Change in Singapore: Taking Urgent Measures towards a Smart and Green Future

The subject of climate change does not rank highly on the minds of many Singaporeans. Yet, it is one of the most pressing issues that confront our future and, much more significantly, the future of our children and grandchildren.

The melting of our polar caps and the concomitant rising of sea-levels must worry Singaporeans. It is estimated that the flooding of coastal cities from rising sea-levels could affect millions of people across the globe. NASA estimates that low-lying cities like Singapore will be submerged underwater by the end of the century if current global warming trends continue.

Last year, 2024 was the hottest year on record in Singapore with average temperatures around 28.4C. In addition to the direct effects of increased heat and severe weather events which have already begun to affect Singapore, there are indirect effects. Change in weather patterns affect food production and farming in our neighbouring countries. When ocean temperatures rise and affects fish supply or if rising temperatures lower crop yields, food supply falls. As a result, prices of basic foodstuff like rice, fish and vegetable will increase.

One fundamental principle of the SDP's policy is a moratorium on destruction of our forests. The marked reduction in the secondary forests of Dover and Clementi and the erroneous removal of a sizeable portion of the Kranji forest cannot be replaced. Another controversial development involved the construction of the Cross Island MRT Line which be tunnelled under the Central Catchment Nature Reserve. The project will proceed despite protests from environmental groups and experts who say the construction would adversely affect the area's wildlife and nature. Forests and reserves are the 'lungs' of the country and the continued destruction of these areas will harm the island and its inhabitants.

In our original paper we proposed a switch to completely electric vehicles by 2040. The government then brought that date forward to 2030 with a proposal to not register cars powered by internal combustion engines after 2030 although it may not meet that target. As a start, taxi and bus companies should be the first in line to switch totally to EVs. This is because these vehicles run the most mileage per vehicle and emit the highest amounts of carbon pollution per vehicle. While attempts have been made to increase the number of charging points, these are still relatively limited especially in public housing estates. In addition, there are limited tax incentives to promote the adoption of EVs. These can be markedly improved.

Transitional to renewable energy in for domestic and industrial use. There was a moratorium on data centers because of their high energy consumption as we proposed but this was lifted. Singapore has also started importing renewable energy from Laos and other sites. However, the more widespread use of solar and wind energy in Singapore and our surrounding islands has not been fully explored despite numerous calls from civil society and technology entrepreneurs. This could be enhanced by a two pronged approach which supports funding for innovative renewable energy projects and also higher taxes on fossil fuel refining, consumption and other uses. The carbon taxes so generated can fund the work on innovative renewable energy solutions.

Reduce population pressures. A major cause of climate change has been anthropogenic activity. More people simply means a greater need for building, construction and transportation. The PAP has consistently refused to state an ideal population size for Singapore and in the last year, our population has crossed the six million mark. We are a small island and this relentless overpopulation is going to have a significant impact not just on our wellbeing but also on our environment. Land reclamation to generate space for the increased population requires the importation of large quantities of sand which can have a devastating impact on the ecology of the source nation and also an impact on the fragile ecosystems of our coastlines.

Finally, Singapore needs to take an international leadership role in the effort to contain climate change. We are greatly impacted by forest fires in neighbouring countries but at the same time are home to a number of the worse culprits in terms of companies which fund such land clearing on the peatlands. We need to ensure transparency of reporting and engage civil society actively in monitoring the actions of all companies, especially Singapore companies with an environmental impact on our neighbours.

With the right political will, we can have clean energy jobs which will aid the transition away from fossil fuels as well as ground up initiatives to ensure climate justice for all.

## BUILDING A PEOPLE SOUND POLICIES FOR A SECURE FUTURE

In June 2024, according to Singapore government statistics, our population crossed 6.04 million, with Singapore citizens making up 3.64 million. Our city is already one of the most densely populated countries in the world. Overcrowding and the failure of our infrastructure to effectively deal with the population load has led to escalating housing prices, diminished job opportunities, over-extended public transport and healthcare systems, increased stress and a general lowering of quality of life for Singapo reans. The approach of the People's Action Party (PAP) government over the last two decades has not addressed these challenges meaningfully. The government's White Paper on Population failed to tackle Singapore's demographic challenges because it has not departed from the policy fundamentals that gave rise to the present situation.

The PAP government announced its intention to increase the population to 6 million by 2020 (it had originally announced 6.9 million by 2030 but abandoned that narrative due to public criticism). Despite the pandemic which temporarily halted the inflows, the 6 million figure has already been reached last year. During the last GE, the PAP again refused to give a population parameter that they were aiming for. The daily lived experience of every person in Singapore who does not live in a mansion in Ridout Road speaks to the considerable strain on our resources and infrastructure. This further lowers the overall liveability of this island.

A new approach is needed. The current government's population policy that appears to place economic growth as its main objective and gross domestic product (GDP) as its key performance indicator cannot handle the totality of factors that promote quality of life. Population management is a central feature of a country's total policy framework and therefore requires a more holistic, systemic and future-oriented methodology, capable of linking various policy outcomes into a coherent whole, always with the welfare of individual Singaporeans and their families at its heart.

As such, an arbitrarily selected population figure should not be the starting point of the debate. Policymaking must remain dynamic in relation to changing economic, social, demographic and global/regional conditions. The proper approach to population policymaking is to address the task from the standpoint of the fundamental outcomes generated by the whole complement of national policies rather than within its own four walls.

The Singapore Democratic Party proposes such a programme. We believe that a government's approach to population should focus on an immigration mechanism designed to attract and retain the best talents while preserving the obligation to provide citizens with a fair and equitable labour market. It should additionally address those factors that lead to a better quality of life, principally through ensuring that the cost of living is manageable. Supporting these objectives is an actionable programme to better manage our needs for a rapidly changing world as well as enhance the Singaporean identity. Finally, the nation should move away from GDP to more holistic measures of wellbeing, and align policymakers' incentives with Singaporeans' well -being.

## Enact a Singaporeans First Policy

A nation should always ensure that the well-being of its citizens is prioritised. We therefore propose the implementation of a Talent Track Scheme to ensure that only foreign professionals whose skills and credentials are rigorously verified may work in Singapore. Businesses seeking to hire foreign professionals will be required to demonstrate that the competencies they seek are not available within the Singaporean candidate pool. Fair employment laws will also be passed to protect the interests of workers. This policy should significantly reduce the number of foreign workers in our midst while maintaining a high quality workforce.

## Introduce Policy Reforms to Retain Singaporean Talent and Raise the Total Fertility Rate

The push factors that lead to significant emigration are a good indicator of the areas of policy that are not meeting Singaporeans' needs and that lead to a suppression of the Total Fertility Rate (TFR). These factors include the price of social goods, such as housing and health care, and the quality of the education system. Ensuring that housing is affordable and reducing the waiting time for flats, facilitating access to good health care by managing costs, and reforming the education system to ensure an all-rounded and creative educational experience are Singaporeans' principal concerns; these factors influence their loyalty to Singapore as well as their ability and willingness to start families. The housing issues are addressed in our housing policy.

## Formulate Plans to Advance Towards a Sustainable Population Profile

The developmental work of a responsible government requires deeper study and policy development around changing population demographics, in order to ensure that Singapore crosses its current demographic hump with increased life expectancy in a smooth and sustainable way. This way fewer people dying young will be seen as a blessing and a boon for our country rather than a 'problem' which needs to be dealt with. There have been numerous attempts by the government including the baby bonus, slightly increased paternity leave and various grants and schemes but these have not had any impact on our TFR.

## Strengthen the Singaporean Identity

Citizens and new immigrants should both feel a sense of belonging, loyalty and pride in their country. Policies that entrench ethnic and other differences work against this. The selective Ethnic Integration Policy should be abolished, and the race identification on our National Registration Identity Cards should be removed, as has been done in other countries.

Sensible immigration limits will allow Singaporean culture to strengthen and flourish, and facilitate the organic emergence of a Singapore Identity that new immigrants can take pride in being a part of. A population policy that leads to a majority of residents being foreigners will, on the other hand, cause the Singapore Identity to constantly remain insecure -this inevitably has a detrimental effect on the loyalty and sense of belonging that future generations have towards this country.

## Go Beyond the GDP in Measuring National Progress

It has long been established that GDP is a blunt tool in its use as a measurement of the well-being of our citizens and their families. A new index, drawing on the Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) methodology, facilitates a more holistic indicator of national progress by factoring in the costs (such as increased crime and vice, family breakdowns, decrease in mental health, etc.) that go into producing GDP growth. We clearly have a lot of talent in our civil service and if this is focused on improving the quality of life in Singapore, the barriers to starting a family will come down and our existential fertility decline will be reversed.

## Revamp the Ministerial Pay Formula and Senior Civil Servants'KPIs

Alongside a more coherent and comprehensive measure of well-being, such as the GPI, the remunerative incentives of Cabinet ministers and senior administrators should be realigned to ensure that citizen well-being remains the essential measure of the success of policies and programmes. This could be translated into programs (such as universal healthcare and educational reforms which prioritize holistic development over test taking skills) which ensure a better living environment with less stress on the infrastructure and population and a genuine increase in quality of life for everyone in Singapore.

Establishing a more systematic and comprehensive suite of policies that seek to ensure Singaporeans' holistic well -being through better study and progress measurement will broaden the approach to population management. Our country's economic growth and our citizens' welfare are both of great importance. The policy measures outlined above will initiate a deeper and more meaningful policy framework directed towards achieving a better quality of life for Singaporeans, a more sustainable economic model, and a resilient Singapore.


Affordable housing is a huge concern among Singaporeans who are increasingly finding themselves priced out. To address this problem, the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) has proposed a new approach to increase the affordability of, and access to, public housing for all Singaporeans. In addition, an increasing number of HDB flats are approaching the 79 th  year of their lease beyond which buyers cannot use CPF funds to purchase the flat. This will place the owners in a very precarious position as for many individuals, the bulk of their retirement savings would be concentrated in their flats which might rapidly decline in value. The government had promised a voluntary en-bloc redevelopment scheme seven years ago but no further details have been provided since. This makes retirement planning for residents very challenging.

The policy ideas contained in this paper, Housing a Nation: Holistic Policies for Affordable Homes tackle the key issue of affordability by introducing an innovative new housing scheme -the Non-Open Market (NOM) scheme -to our public housing system. This paper also introduces supplementary policies to support young families and foster inclusiveness within our public housing system.

Under the NOM system, prices of public housing will be lower because the cost of an HDB flat will only include the cost of construction and administration. NOM HDB flats will be built on land specially zoned for public housing and not contain a land cost component. This is unlike the current HDB practice of including the cost of land in public housing.

As a result, the NOM scheme can offer public housing to Singaporeans according to prices listed below:

## HDB prices under the NOM scheme

| Flat-type           | NOM Scheme Guide Price*   |
|---------------------|---------------------------|
| 2-Room (99 years)** | $90,000                   |
| 3-Room (99 years)** | $120,000                  |
| 4-Room (99 years)   | $200,000                  |
| 5-Room (99 years)   | $270,000                  |
| Studio (30 years)   | $40,000                   |

- * Prices will vary depending on location and other flat characteristics. The guide prices represent an average.
- ** Grants available

For first-timer low-income households (with average gross monthly incomes of less than $4,000) HDB's CPF Housing Grant scheme will be adapted and improved to provide grants for buying 2-room and 3-room flats. Grants will not be required for first-timers with higher household incomes and other buyers. This will save several hundred millions per year for taxpayers and MOF/MND.

The key features of the NOM system are as follows:

- 1. NOM flats may only be sold back to HDB at the purchase price less the consumed lease, their leases cannot be transferred in the HDB resale market.
- 2. Current owners of Open Market (OM) flats will have the option of converting to the NOM scheme, where the Government will return an amount based on the original purchase price from the HDB and the price of NOM flat of the same type.

- 3. HDB will hold a buffer stock of HDB flats to enable Singaporeans to obtain their flats with minimal waiting times.

Housing a Nation: Holistic Policies for Affordable Homes also makes the following policy recommendations:

- 1. Implement the Young Families Priority Scheme (YFPS), a targeted priority scheme that grants balloting priority for first-timer families with children or couples who are expectant for Balance Flats or new Built-To-Order Flats in non-mature estates.
- 2. Increase the inclusiveness of public housing by enabling single parent families with children and low-income households to to rent flats for two years at a time, without being subject to reviews every few months
- 3. Enhance the Lease Buy-Back Scheme to more effectively assist needy senior citizens to have a secure retirement.

The NOM system will increase the affordability and access to public housing for all Singaporeans. While our suggestions for young families and Singaporeans with special needs will ensure our public housing system is inclusive. The retirement adequacy of citizens will be enhanced through lower mortgage repayments and higher savings accumulation in our CPF accounts.

Collectively, these SDP policies can contribute towards resolving some of the major problems affecting public housing in Singapore today.

## Educating For Creativity and Equality: An Agenda For Transformation


Singapore's education system suffers from two major deficiencies. One, it is unable to educate our people  to  meet  the  challenges  of  a  21st-century  global  economy  which  increasingly  demands creativity and innovation. Two, based on the philosophy of Lee Kuan Yew and the current PAP, our schools  continue  to  steer  state  resources  to  disproportionately  benefit  the  elite,  thus  widening inequality in Singapore.

The  Singapore  Democratic  Party  (SDP)  presents  this  alternative  policy  paper  to  remedy  these inadequacies and provide our nation with an education system that values our children and how they learn  and  grow,  rather  than  treating  them  like  trophies  to  be  won  at  international  science  and mathematics competitions. We want to nurture the young mind and lead her to discover her creative self, not just teach her how to do well in examinations. We also seek to level up society by providing our students equal opportunities to excel regardless of their family background.

We do this by starting with our young ones. Education doesn't begin when a child enters primary school; it starts at maternity and early childhood. Since our policy was published, the government has introduced a limited number of Ministry of Education (MOE) kindergartens. These have proven to be very popular as they obviously address a need which SDP identified. However, the majority of children are not covered by these MOE kindergartens to date.This inevitability creates a chasm where the  well-to-do  can  afford  expensive  programmes  that  provide  enriched  learning  for  their  preschoolers while a significant proportion of children from  families with modest means have to stay home because their parents are unable to send them to kindergarten. Inequality starts early.

The primary school system exacerbates this gap by subjecting pupils to intense, content heavy syllabi where  teachers  are  under  pressure  to  complete  the  topics  regardless  of  whether  the  students understand the material or not. Parents then seek tuition for their children to keep up with the school work. Again, richer families are able to pay for such private tutoring while the poorer families cannot afford it and are, again, further disadvantaged.

In addition, students spend much of their weekends and school holidays completing their homework assignments and revision for examinations, leaving them little time for reading and recreation-two activities essential for lifelong learning.

To overcome these challenges, the SDP proposes the following:

- 1. Cultivate  creative  minds. Primary  and  secondary  school  curricula  will  be  revised  to include activities that will cultivate creativity in our students. Since our original policy proposal,  MOE  has  introduced  an  Adaptive  Learning  System  (ALS)  for  Primary  5

Mathematics which attempts to personalise education but its implementation has been limited to date. Similarly for the Learning for Life programs which are not all available in  all  schools.    While  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  is  helpful,  teachers  are  still  vital. Teachers  will be trained to build confidence in students, identify their strengths and passions, and facilitate the development of their creative skills.

- 2. Do away with the PSLE. The focus of the primary school system is on the PSLE where students  are  trained  to  memorise  their  school  work  and  drilled  to  do  well  in  the examination. Scrapping it will allow teachers to teach and students to learn in a holistic manner.  The  attempt  to  'reduce  the  stress'  associated  with  the  PSLE  by  using achievement  levels  rather  than  T-scores  merely  replaces  one  problem  with  another. Children now can no longer rely on the other subjects to make up for a poor score in one subject  as  they  could  under  the  old  T-score  system.  Now  they  have  to  do  well  in  all subjects to achieve the optimum achievement levels. The PSLE needs to be done away with completely.
- 3. Broaden  curriculum,  reduce  workload. The  number  of  subjects  at  the  primary  and secondary  school  level  will  be  broadened  to  include  student-collaboration  projects, speech and drama, and humanities and the arts as well as enhanced digital literacy. The content of traditional subjects like mathematics and science will, however, be reduced. Such an approach will enrich the educational experience of our students and prepare them for a future that will require them to be well-rounded, intelligent individuals.
- 4. Reduce class size. Class sizes will be reduced so that one teacher will have a class of no more than 20 students. This will enable teachers to pay more attention to the development of each of the students.
- 5. Introduce the Dedicated-Teacher System. One teacher will be assigned to a class and he/she will take the set of students from Primary 1 to 3 before another teacher takes over from Primary 4 to 6. Giving a teacher three years (instead of only one) to teach a student, allows the teacher to acquire substantial knowledge about the student's developmental progress. This allows the teacher more time to plan and implement relevant interventions. Such  an  arrangement  will  also  provide  opportunities  for  parents  and  teachers  to collaborate on and facilitate the well-rounded development of the child.
- 6. Eliminate school and class ranking. We recommended this in our original proposal and MOE has switched  to  full  subject  based  banding  which  allows  students  of  different abilities  in  various  subjects  to  remain  in  their  classes  without  being  streamed.  This applies only to non-IP or SAP schools and is a good but limited step. It recognises that education  is not about  competition  with  one's  classmates  but  learning  through collaboration and teamwork with one's peers. The competition for top-ranked schools is unhealthy  and  has  inflicted  serious  psychological  damage  to  our  children.  Streaming needs to be removed for all schools and just like the GEP is now being expanded to all primary schools, more schools should have the the IP option rather than a handful of elite schools.

- 7. Nationalise  pre-schools.  As  mentioned  above,  after  our  proposal,  MOE  introduced national MOE kindergartens but they are being rolled out slowly despite their popularity. All p reschools in Singapore will be nationalised to ensure that Singaporean children from all walks of life have access to very low cost preschool education. In this way, the poorer segments of society will not be disadvantaged just because they cannot afford to send their  children  to  kindergartens.  This  was  very  successfully  done  in  the  1960s  with  a national primary and secondary school system and should be extended to preschools.
- 8. At the tertiary level, our university system must also ensure that a student's financial background  will  not  be  a  deterrent  in  his  education.  The  SDP  proposes  interest-free student  loans  for  all  undergraduates  to  support  their  university  fees.  Loan-repayment commences only when the graduate is gainfully employed rather than at graduation which is the current case.
- 9. For our universities to excel, this paper also proposes that our tertiary institutions should beare completely autonomous and free from state-interference; academic freedom must be sacrosanct. In addition, university leadership must be democratically elected by the faculty staff and not appointed by the government and the administration.
- 10. Increased digital literacy for our children. We propose compulsory digital literacy courses for all primary school children so they are better equipped to decide for themselves what is accurate and what are harmful influences to avoid online. Digital skills and artificial intelligence  need  to  be  incorporated  in  teaching  at  all  stages  but  with  guidance  from appropriately trained teachers. There have been attempts in many schools to incorporate IT in teaching in Singapore for years but there has not been a clear national strategy which applies to all schools and all students.
- 11. Any nation wanting to foster an inclusive society cannot ignore the situation of children with special needs. Although the government has put in place mechanisms to include children  with  disabilities  in  our  regular  schools,  more  needs  to  be  done.  Presently, Voluntary Welfare Organisations (VWOs) still provide much of the education of special needs children. Since the publication of our report, the Transition Support for Integration (TRANSIT) program has been introduced for early primary school children. Under the SDP plan, the government will take over all special education and centralise such services with  the  help  and  support  of  the  experienced  VWOs  now  known  as  social  service agencies.

In 1994, SDP Secretary-General Chee Soon Juan asked in Dare To Change: An Alternative Vision for Singapore

- '...does the PAP have a clear idea of what education is, or should be, besides defining it in dollars and cents? Who is the Singaporean? What would we like to see in him or her? How should education serve the needs of Singapore? Why are Singaporeans not reading as much as their counterparts in other countries?...As long as we fail to address these issues, we will be caught in a cyclical pattern of making patchy revisions to our educational system that will lead us nowhere.'

Forty years have passed and the education system has failed to evolve in a way that enables our society to meet the challenges that loom. Observers at the US Embassy in Singapore had previously noted that

'Singapore's education system has been criticized for being heavy on memorization and light on critical  thinking  and  creativity.  Based  on  the  British  model,  the  system  is  highly  testfocused and separates students (a process referred to as 'streaming') at an early age between high, middle, and low achievers...the overall education system has changed little.'

Education  must  be  the  process  where  an  individual  learns  to  discover  oneself  and,  in  doing  so, endeavour to improve the human condition. For the sake of our nation's future, it is important that we teach our children that reading and learning can be enjoyable and intrinsically rewarding. We must let our children be children. They should be encouraged to read, play, discover themselves and for themselves, and develop a love for books. The goal should be to lead our students to learn, not push them to study. The former will open up their naturally enquiring minds, the latter will kill off curiosity.

The objective of our education system must be to facilitate the learning process with the ultimate aim of helping our children achieve their true potential and reach their own levels of self-actualisation. If we are able to achieve this, we will reap the benefits of not just a talented workforce but also, and more importantly, a thinking and caring people.
